Bhagya Lakshmi is an Hindi Indian television drama series which premiered on 3 August 2021 on Zee TV and digital platform ZEE5.
 Produced by Ekta Kapoor's Balaji Telefilms, the show stars Aishwarya Khare and Rohit Suchanti in lead roles.


Plot 

Hailing from a middle-class Punjabi Hindu family, the Bajwas are all set to get their eldest daughter Lakshmi married to Varun However, when Lakshmi and her family are on their way to the mandap in a bus, a storm hits and the bus ends up dangling over a cliff.
 Everyone except Lakshmi's parents manages to get out of the bus okay.
 Manoj falls of the bus and dangles on it and makes his brother promise that he will get Lakshmi married.
 The bus with Kuljeet and Manoj still in it falls down the cliff.
 Kuljeet and Manoj, die in an accident, leaving Lakshmi disheartened and broken.
 On the other hand, Lakshmi’s aunt, Rano wants to usurp Manoj’s property.
 She asks Manoj's assistant, Guru Charan to open the safe to get the money, however, he rejects her and says that Manoj's last wish was to get Lakshmi married and that after Rano completes his last wish, she can take everything.
 Rano later decides to pretend to show Guru that she will give the sisters a good life and she begins her plan by breaking Lakshmi’s marriage with Varun, in order to take her to Mumbai and marry her off to some man.


Soon, Rano, Preetam, Neha, Lakshmi, Shalu, and Bani leave for Mumbai They end up crash landing in a hotel that belongs to Rishi Oberoi, son of an industrialist, who seems to be arrogant and deceitful, but he is also as kind and selfless as Lakshmi.
 Later, Lakshmi and her sisters hide in Rishi’s office while Rishi gets frustrated about running late to a model’s event and people trespassing his 5-star hotel.
 Lakshmi gets Rishi to promise that he won’t get them arrested but Rishi breaks the promise and gets them arrested for trespassing and stealing an auto.
 Rano and Preetam get them freed with the help of Rishi’s driver, Balwinder who secretly lusts for Neha.


Balwinder does as Rano says and then the other day at Balwinder and Lakshmi's wedding, Balwinder gets drunk and says absurd things about Rishi and his hotel Rishi's flight for France gets cancelled and he rushes to the hotel.
 There he sees a bad condition of his hotel and he scolds Balwinder and blames him for the poor condition of his hotel.
 The hotel catches fire, everybody gets out.
 Rishi rushes in the hotel to ensure nobody is stuck inside but he himself gets stuck in a room and because of inhaling smoke he faints.
 Lakshmi comes to rescue him.
 Next day, Rishi's father comes to thank Lakshmi and gets highly affected by her simplicity and good upbringing and asks Rano and her husband to marry Lakshmi to Rishi but they misunderstand that he was asking for Neha.
 Rishi's father conveys the same to a confused Rishi and Neelam (Rishi's mother).
 They agree to meet Lakshmi for once.


Later when Rishi's parents arrive to give shagun to Lakshmi, the misunderstanding gets cleared and Virendra (Rishi's father) asks Lakshmi to decide  But after being consoled by Virendra (seeing her father in him), Lakshmi agrees to meet Rishi on a date and then decide.
 Thus, Rishi and Lakshmi get ready to go on a date.
 Lakshmi then gets impressed by him.
 Later, the two go for a dinner and Lakshmi notices his selflessness there too.
 Lakshmi phones up Neha and Rano to tell that Rishi was nothing like Rano and Neha had described.
 Coming back home, Balwinder attacks Rishi's car but they both save each other.
 Rishi invites Bajwas to his birthday.
 In the party Rishi and Lakshmi fall for each other and Rishi proposes Lakshmi for marriage.
 She agrees for the marriage.
 Rishi's father announces Rishi and Lakshmi's engagement the next day.
 All get happy except Neha, Rano and Balwinder.
 In engagement, Balwinder shows some fake intimate pictures of him and Lakshmi and tries to break engagement but Rishi shows his immense faith on Lakshmi and proves her innocent and sends Balwinder to jail.
 They both get engaged and Lakshmi starts falling in love with Rishi.


The marriage events start to take place where Balwinder and his goons try to kidnap Lakshmi and marry her However, Abhi and Pragya save her.
 After that Neha tries to make Lakshmi unconscious and marry Rishi.
 However, her plan gets foiled because of Srishti and Rakhi.
 Balwinder tries to make Lakshmi drink water so that she can be unconscious however Karan, Sameer and Preeta foil his plan.
 Finally, Rishi and Lakshmi get married.
 However, Rishi shows his true colors and confesses that he doesn't love Lakshmi and he was forced into the marriage.
 Nanaji (Neelam's dad) asks Lakshmi and Rishi to go for a honeymoon.
 For the sake of Nanaji, they both go on honeymoon.
 However, Rishi falls in a lake and is captured by a crocodile.
 Lakshmi saves him but both get injured.
 To visit Rishi, Rishi's girlfriend Malishka comes there.
 It is revealed that Rishi is married to Lakshmi only because of his Kundali Dosh and Lakshmi is the only girl who can always save him.
 It is also revealed that after 1 year Rishi is planning to divorce Lakshmi and get married to Malishka.


During Karva Chauth a snake bites Rishi and Lakshmi saves him by sucking out the poison In the ambulance, Rishi gains consciousness but Lakshmi faints as she sucked all the poison from Rishi's body.
 In the hospital, Rishi feels guilty and it is seen that slowly Rishi has started caring for Lakshmi.
 After that Ayush and Virendra vow to bring Rishi and Lakshmi close.
 During Diwali Rishi and Lakshmi come closer.
 Malishka enters the party with Viraj.
 Later on, Lakshmi confesses her love for Rishi to him but Rishi loves Malishka and Lakshmi gets to know about their affair.
 She breaks all the ties with Rishi and his family, and returns to her uncle's house.


Cast

Main 
 Aishwarya Khare as Lakshmi Rishi Oberoi (née Bajwa): Kuljeet and Manoj's eldest daughter; Shalu and Bani's sister; Neha's cousin; Rishi's wife (2021–present)
 Rohit Suchanti as Rishi Oberoi: Neelam and Virendra's son; Sonia's brother; Ahana, Ayush and Devika's cousin; Lakshmi's husband (2021–present)

Recurring
 Munira Kudrati as Shalini "Shalu" Bajwa: Kuljeet and Manoj's second daughter; Bani and Lakshmi's sister; Neha's cousin; Ayush's love interest (2021–present)
 Aman Gandhi as Ayushmann "Ayush" Chopra: Karishma and Manpreet's son; Ahana's brother; Rishi, Devika and Sonia's cousin; Shalu's love interest (2021–present)
 Mansi Bhanushali as Bani Bajwa: Kuljeet and Manoj's youngest daughter; Lakshmi's and Shalu's sister; Neha's cousin (2021–present)
 Smita Bansal as Neelam Oberoi: Virendra's wife; Rishi and Sonia's mother (2021–present)
 Uday Tikekar as Virendra Oberoi: Harleen and Vishwas's son; Karishma and Mahendra's brother; Neelam's husband; Rishi and Sonia's father (2021–present)
 Neena Cheema as Harleen Vishwas Oberoi: Vishwas' widowed wife; Karishma, Virendra and Mahendra's mother; Ahana, Ayushman, Rishi, Sonia and Devika's grandmother (2021–present)
Shivani Jha as Sonia Oberoi: Neelam and Virendra's daughter; Rishi's sister (2021–present)
 Parul Chaudhary as Karishma Manpreet Chopra: Harleen and Vishwas' daughter; Virendra and Mahendra's sister; Manpreet's wife; Ahana and Ayush's mother (2021–present)
 Hemant Thatte as Manpreet Chopra: Karishma's husband; Ahana and Ayush's father (2021–present)
 Aditi Shetty as Ahana Chopra: Karishma and Manpreet's daughter; Ayush's sister; Rishi, Sonia and Devika's cousin (2021–present)
 Bebika Dhurve as Devika Oberoi: Mahendra's daughter; Ahana, Ayush, Rishi and Sonia's cousin (2021–present)
 Masshe Uddin Qureshi as Preetam Bajwa: Manoj's brother; Rano's husband; Neha's father (2021–present)
 Neha Prajapati as Rano Preetam Bajwa: Pritam's wife; Neha's mother (2021–present)
 Avantika Chaudhary as Neha Bajwa: Rano and Preetam's daughter; Lakshmi, Shalu and Bani's cousin; Ayush's one sided lover (2021–present)
 Karuna Verma as Kiran Abhay Bedi: Abhay's wife; Malishka's mother (2021–present)
 Ankit Bhatia as Balwinder Sood: Lakshmi's ex-fiancé; Rishi's driver (2021–present)
Maera Mishra as Malishka Bedi: Kiran and Abhay's daughter; Rishi's girlfriend; Viraj's best friend (2021–present)
 Akash Choudhary as Viraj Singhania: Malishka's best friend (2021–present)
Kaushal Kapoor as Darshan: Lakshmi's employer (2022–present)
Mridula Oberoi as Kalyani: Lakshmi's boss (2022–present) 
Virendra Saxena as Manoj Bajwa: Pritam's brother; Kuljeet's husband; Lakshmi, Shalu and Bani's father (2021) (Dead)
Neelu Dogra as Kuljeet Manoj Bajwa: Manoj's wife; Lakshmi, Shalu and Bani's mother (2021) (Dead)
S Ashraf Karim as Gurucharan Anand: Manoj's friend and accountant (2021)

Special appearances
Sriti Jha as Pragya Abhishek Mehra
Shabir Ahluwalia as Abhishek Mehra
Shraddha Arya as Dr Preeta Karan Luthra
Dheeraj Dhoopar as Karan Luthra
Anjum Fakih  as Srishti Arora 
Supriya Shukla as Sarla Raghuveer Arora
Anisha Hinduja as Rakhi Mahesh Luthra
Abhishek Kapur as Sameer Luthra

Episodes 
Ep 1: Hailing from a middle-class Punjabi Hindu family, the Bajwas are all set to get their daughter Lakshmi (Aishwarya Khare) married to Varun.
 However, when Lakshmi and her family are on their way to the mandap in a bus, a storm hits and the bus ends up dangling over a cliff.
 Everyone except Lakshmi's parents manages to leave the bus.
 Manoj falls off the bus and dangles on it and makes his brother promise that he will get Lakshmi married.
 The bus with Kuljeet and Manoj still in it falls down the cliff.
 Kuljeet and Manoj die in an accident, leaving Lakshmi disheartened and broken.
 On the other hand, Lakshmi's aunt, Rano, wants to usurp the Manoj's property.
 She asks Manoj's assistant, Guru Charan to open the safe to get the money, however, he rejects her and says that Manoj's last wish was to get Lakshmi married and that after Rano completes his last wish, she can take everything.
 Rano later decides to pretend to show Guru that she will give the sisters a good life and she begins her plan by breaking Lakshmi's marriage with Varun, in order to take her to Mumbai and marry her off to some man.


Ep 2: Very soon, Rano, Preetam, Neha, Lakshmi, Shalu and Bani leave for Mumbai.
 On the way, the sisters and Lakshmi come across a woman who tells Lakshmi that her destiny will crash with her in Mumbai and that this is all just a game for her to meet what destiny has planned for her.
 Ignoring it, they all get on the train and leave.
 On their first day in Mumbai, the girls nearly get kidnapped.
 Lakshmi saves herself and her sisters by stealing the auto.
 They end up crash landing in a hotel that belongs to Rishi Oberoi (Rohit Suchanti), an industrialist's son who seems to be arrogant and untrustworthy, but however, he is also as kind and selfless as Lakshmi.
 Later, Lakshmi and her sisters hide in Rishi's office while Rishi gets frustrated about running late to a model’s event and people trespassing his five-star hotel.
 Rishi says that "I Promise that if you get out before 10 seconds i will not call the Police".


Awards and nominations

Production

Casting
Khare and Suchanti were finalised to reprise their roles as leads in May 2021 itself, but due to the lockdown in Maharashtra, they signed the contract only in June

Filming
The filming and production began on 14 June 2021 in Film City, Mumbai

Release
The first promotional teaser was released on 16 June 2021, featuring Kundali Bhagya's Shraddha Arya playing Preeta introduce the female-lead of this series, Aishwarya Khare playing the role, Lakshmi

Following that, on 18 June 2021, another teaser was released featuring Kumkum Bhagya's Sriti Jha playing Pragya introduce Aishwarya Khare as her close-friend, Lakshmi

Launch
Ekta Kapoor the producer of the show stated, “Lakshmi is one of the purest souls we have worked on as a character in a long time She represents inherent goodness – neki, a value that’s perhaps diminished in people’s vocabulary over the years, but it shouldn’t.
 As mankind, we’ve been through a lot lately and some of the toughest times have a way of bringing forth shining examples of kindness and benevolence.
 We’ve all read stories of people who went out on a foot during the pandemic and helped others in need.
 Lakshmi’s a lot like that.
 And when you see someone like that, you fall in love with them and want to see life presenting them with good bhagya (destiny).
 Aishwarya Khare with her endearing sincerity and warmth is the right fit for Lakshmi whereas Rohit Suchanti will win hearts as always with his role as the flamboyant, practical, and dashing Rishi.
”

References

External links
 
 Official Website

Kumkum Bhagya
Balaji Telefilms television series
Zee TV original programming
Hindi-language television shows
Indian drama television series
Indian television soap operas
2021 Indian television series debuts
Television shows set in Mumbai
Indian romance television series
Indian television spin-offs
Bhagya Lakshmi Watch Online