Robert Johnson (c.
1657-1730) was an English-born politician and judge in early eighteenth-century Ireland.
 He sat in the Irish House of Commons and  was appointed  a Baron of the Exchequer.
 In the  early  1700s he was one of an inner circle of advisors to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.


He was born in England, the eldest  son of Robert Johnson  senior and grandson of Edward Johnson, Bencher of the Inner Temple The  Johnsons were related  to the  Earl of Arlington: the relationship was close enough for Arlington to further the Johnson family's interests.
 His father, who  was also a barrister, came to Ireland after the Restoration of Charles II  as secretary to Sir Edward Smith, 
the  Chief Justice of  the Irish  Common Pleas and had a successful career,  despite his chronic ill-health He sat  briefly in the Irish House of Commons as member for  Lisburn in 1665-6 and was a justice of the Court of Common Pleas (Ireland) 1670-86.


Career 

Robert, the son,  was admitted to the Inner Temple, when still at school, at his grandfather's request He was educated at the University of Dublin   and matriculated  in 1671.
 He entered the King's Inns in 1677.
 Like his father he entered the Irish House of Commons, sitting first as member for Trim and later for Athboy.

He enjoyed the patronage of James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde, later Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,  and became one of his crucial advisors or "managers"A handwritten "managerial list" identifying those MPs who  supported  Ormonde as Lord Lieutenant  and those who 
opposed him,  which was prepared by Johnson in 1706,  survives

In 1703 he was elevated to the Bench as Baron of the Court of Exchequer (Ireland) As noted above he was also a  crucial member of the Duke of Ormonde's  managerial team, even 
after  he became  a  judge,  and corresponded with him regularly
Even in an age of bitter political faction, he was described as a "fanatical Tory"Such views, which were common  among the Irish political class under Queen Anne of England, were not acceptable  after the change of dynasty  in 1714,   especially after his great patron Ormonde, now revealed  as a Jacobite,   fled to France in 1715.
 Even though Johnson had always  denounced  Jacobitism, and had openly welcomed the accession of the House of Hanover, he was dismissed from the Bench, as were nearly all of Queen  Anne's Irish judges, although his dismissal was postponed into the New Year.


In 1716, like his former colleagues, he was closely questioned  by the House of Commons about the role  which  the High Court judges had played in the bitter clash between the central government and Dublin Corporation in 1712-3, which had brought the whole administration to a standstill He admitted that the judges' behaviour had been improper,  but no action was taken against him.


In 1721 there was some prospect of a return to the Bench, as his lifelong friend (and future son-in-law) Sir Richard Levinge, 1st Baronet, was now Chief Justice of the Irish Common Pleas Levinge,  who 
was   himself  a 
Tory, though  a very moderate  one, had a low opinion of his fellow judges and of most 
of  their possible replacements, and urged Johnson's reappointment
However Johnson was still considered too extreme a Tory: he was passed over,  and lived  out his last decade in retirement in County Kildare

Family 

He married in 1681 Margaret Dixon, daughter of Sir Richard Dixon of Calverstown, County Kildare  and Mary Eustace, and aunt of Robert Dixon, judge of the Court of Common Pleas (Ireland); she cannot have been much more than fifteen at the timeThey had one son, yet another Robert, who predeceased his father,  and  at least two daughters, Mary (died 1757) and Frances.
  Mary married as his second wife her father's close friend Sir Richard Levinge, who was more than forty years her senior.
 Although Levinge  was close to seventy and in constant pain from gout, they managed to have one son, also Richard,  born just before his father's death.
  Young Richard lived  mainly  on the Dixon estate at Calverstown, presumably  as a  permanent guest of  his relative Mr Justice Dixon.
 Mary in 1732 remarried Charles Annesley, a grandson of the Earl of Anglesey.
 Frances married Hon.
 Robert Allen, a younger son of John  Allen, 1st Viscount Allen and Mary FitzGerald, and had five children, of whom at least two  daughters, also  called Mary and Frances,  reached adult life.


Sources
Ball, F Elrington The Judges in Ireland 1221-1921  London John Murray 1926
Bergin, John "Levinge, Sir Richard" Cambridge Dictionary of Irish Biography 
Debrett's Peerage 1828 edition
Hayton, David "Ruling Ireland 1685-1742: Politics,  Politicians and Parties" Boydell  Press 2004
Kenny, Colum King's Inns and the Kingdom of Ireland Dublin Irish Academic Press 1992
Neill, Trevor Lisburn Parliamentary Representatives  in the Seventeenth Century (1995)   Lisburn Historical Society Journal Vol9 
Smyth,  Constantine Joseph "Chronicle of the Law Officers of Ireland" Butterworths London  1839

Notes

Barons of the Irish Exchequer
Alumni of Trinity College Dublin
Members of the Inner Temple
1650s births
1730 deaths
Members of the Parliament of Ireland (pre-1801) for County Antrim constituencies