Marvel's Wastelanders is an interconnected series of radio drama podcasts produced by Marvel New Media and SiriusXM in association with Wave Runner Studios and launched in June 2021.
 The series' podcasts are set in a version of the Old Man Logan universe, a future timeline where supervillains have killed most superheroes and divided the world into personal realms.
 Announced for the series are four 10-episode podcasts focusing on future versions of Star-Lord, Wolverine, Hawkeye, and Black Widow.
 A fifth series featuring a team-up of the characters has also been announced.
 The first series in the project, Marvel's Wastelanders: Old Man Star-Lord, launched in June 2021.


In September 2021, Marvel announced that starting with Marvel's Wastelanders: Hawkeye, its podcasts would debut first via a subscription service on Apple Podcasts The fifth title in the series, Marvel's Wastelanders: Doom, was mentioned in the announcement.
 The same announcement included a retitling of the series, dropping the "Old Man" labels from the podcast names.


Series

Star-Lord
Star-Lord and Rocket Raccoon crash land in the American Midwest, a barren wasteland controlled by Doctor Doom, where they must find for The Collector an ancient cosmic relic, the Black Vortex However, they soon encounter a number of challenges, including Kraven the Hunter, outlaw Ghost Riders, and Emma Frost.
 When released, the series was titled Marvel's Wastelanders: Old Man Star-Lord, but with the release of Marvel's Wastelander's: Hawkeye, it was retitled without the "Old Man" moniker.


Voice cast
 Timothy Busfield as Peter Quill/Star-Lord
 Chris Elliott as Rocket Raccoon
 Patrick Page as Kraven the Hunter
 Vanessa Williams as Emma Frost
 Danny Glover as Red Crotter
 Nadine Malouf as Cora, a Rigellian Recorder
 Dylan Baker as Doom and as Doombot
 Quincy Tyler Bernstine as The Collector
 Aasif Mandvi as Rattlesnake Pete
 Aime Donna Kelly as Francine
 Eric T Miller as Brandon Best
 Michael Laurence as Sebastian Warn
 Elizabeth Francis as Joanna Forge
 Blake Morris as Hulk

Episodes

Hawkeye
30 years after Baron Zemo, the Thunderbolts, and the other villains killed the Avengers and rid the world of heroes, a blind and broken Hawkeye relives the final battle nightly as part of the Brotherhood Traveling Circus, Carnival and Ringmaster's Road Show When his 17-year-old daughter, Ash, shows up seeking his help avenging the death of her best friend, Hawkeye's own efforts to avenge his lost friends are complicated.
 For Rachel Chavkin, Hawkeye is the first podcast she has directed.


Voice cast
 Stephen Lang as Clint Barton/Hawkeye
 Sasha Lane as Ash Barton/King Zemo III
 Jess Barbagallo as Max
 Michelle Hurd as Bobbi Morse/Mockingbird
 Bobby Moreno as Fred Dukes Junior
 Joe Morton as Ringmaster
 Tracie Thoms as Kate Bishop/Hawkeye
 Lea DeLaria as Raven/Mystique
 Shuler Hensley as Pyro
 Ron Canada as Abner Jenkins/Beetle
 Reiko Aylesworth as Destiny
 Jim Conroy as Fred Dukes Senior/Blob
 Kristin C as Karla Sofen/Moonstone
 James Saito as King Zemo

Episodes

Black Widow
Originally announced as Marvel's Wastelanders: Grey Widow The mysterious Helen Black moves into a New York City apartment building owned and monitored by S.
H.
I.
E.
L.
D.
.


Voice cast
 Susan Sarandon as Yelena Belova/Black Widow/"Helen Black"
 Eva Amurri as Samantha Sugarman
 Michael Boxleitner as Marco Marmarato
 Nate Corddry as Jordan Temple
 Amber Gray as Judy Kratz
 Melissa Gilbert as KI.
M.

 Chasten Harmon as Lisa Cartwright
 Michael Imperioli as Stanley Petronella
 Justin Kirk as Hank Hammond
 Alan Muraoka as Dr Brian Mizuno
 Will Janowitz as Crispin Burge
 Morgan Fairchild as Tappy Burge

Episodes

Doom

Voice cast
 Dylan Baker as Doom and as Doombot

Production
Marvel's Wastelanders: Star-Lord is the first scripted joint production from Marvel New Media and SiriusXM, and was described by Marvel New Media executive Stephen Wacker as "the tip of the iceberg" for the new Marvel Audio Universe The Wasterlanders podcasting project was originally planned to launch in 2020 as part of a new agreement with SiriusXM and its Pandora streaming service; however, in July 2020, SiriusXM acquired Marvel's previous scripted podcasting partner, Stitcher, in July 2020 in an effort to bolster its portfolio of podcasts.
 Stitcher and Marvel previously produced two seasons of the Wolverine podcast along with a Marvels podcast.
 Author Benjamin Percy, who scripted the Wolverine: The Long Night and Wolverine: The Lost Trail podcasts, was brought on board to script Wastelanders: Star-Lord.


Reception
Marvel's Wastelanders: Star-Lord has been praised for its casting and writing Mike Mack at Laughing Place called Busfield and Elliott's chemistry as Quill and Rocket "hilarious," but noted that Malouf as Cora "steals the show" by providing both explanations and comedy.
 Taylor Bauer at Comic Years credits Percy's experience with both Marvel Comics and writing audio dramas for successfully setting up the world of Marvel's Wastelanders in the first episode without making it feel like a "detail dump.
"

References

External links
 

2021 podcast debuts
American radio dramas
American podcasts
Black Widow (Marvel Comics)
Comic book podcasts
Guardians of the Galaxy characters
Science fiction podcasts
Wolverine (comics) in other media
Works based on Marvel Comics