Have Mare Hira Nathi Ghasva (I Don't Want To Polish Diamonds Anymore) is a 2009 Gujarati film directed by Atul-Arun and produced by Atul Patel, starring Himanshu Turi in lead role.
 The lives of thousands of penurious diamond polishers and the indisposed diamond industry of Gujarat has been the core subject of the film along with the portrayal of socio-economic decay in the state.
 With the intention of paying off the debt, Karshan- the newly married protagonist (played by Himanshu Turi), with wife Radha, migrates to Surat from his village in Bhavnagar to work in the diamond polishing industry.
 He settles down after started working in a diamond polishing industry and until the recession, no adversities cross his road.
 The survival of the protagonist from the slowdown.
 is the major depiction of the film.


Plot
After being married to his long-term girlfriend Radha, Karsan, who hails from Saurashtra, is loaded with heavy debt His need for the extra penny to recover the debt made him located in the country's diamond hub- Surat.
 But the first wave of the recession affected the diamond industry and so did Karsan.
 It resulted in making the city dull and deserted along with leaving Kisan and several like him jobless that lead them to return to their villages.


The film delivers a message that the jobless diamond workers should return to their home instead of committing suicide

Production and release
Patel said that his films showed the struggle and success, joys and sorrows, ups and downs in the life of a diamond worker He drew his inspiration for the film from the lakhs of workers who had come from Saurashtra and other places and settled in Surat.
 The story of the film is written by Harshad Gadhvi.


Produced on a budget of , film's production was completed in three months The film was released on 17 April 2009 in Surat, and later get released in other cities of Gujarat including Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, and Visnagar.
 It run for more than 50 days in theatres.
 In July 2009, the film was released in New Jersey and Chicago (U.
S.
), Leicestershire (U.
K), and Antwerp (Belgium).


References

Gujarati-language films
2009 films
Indian films
Films set in Gujarat
Films about financial crises
2000s Gujarati-language films