"Castaways" is a song that aired in the children's TV show The Backyardigans.
 It went viral on TikTok in 2021.


History 
The song was originally released in 2005, on the first season of The Backyardigans It aired on the show's 11th episode, of the same name.
 It was later released in the album The Backyardigans along with other songs from the show.


Musical style 
The song is set to a bossa nova style It is sung by a group of children, which makes unclear what some of the notes sung are.
 The lyrics are fairly simple and talk about the group of friends being castaways (per the title), lost with no way to go back home.


Virality 
The song became viral on TikTok in March 2021 and was included in over 1,200,000 videos on the platform After achieving virality on the platform, users contributed to the song rising in Spotify charts, with more than 15 million streams.
 The song's virality has prompted covers and reimagined versions in different genres to be uploaded to TikTok.
 Merlysha Pierre (swagsurfff) is believed to be the first, or one of the first people, on the platform to upload videos about The Backyardigans and the song "Castaways".
 The song was later the subject of a video by music theory YouTuber Adam Neely, who talked about the backstory of the song and its production, as well as details regarding its composition and what qualities it has that might have contributed to its popularity.


The song's virality made another song from the show, "Into the Thick of It!", trend in the Spotify Viral 50 United States chart

The song has also inspired many remixes and playlists to be released and compiled within months of the viral takeoff

Song credits

Producer 

 Evan Lurie
Douglas Wieselman

Songwriters 

 Douglas Joel Wieselman - composer

 Leslie Antonio Valdes - lyricist
 McPaul Smith Lawrence - lyricist

Vocals 

 Corwin C Tuggles - as Tyrone
 Jamia Simone Nash - as Uniqua
 Sean Curley - as Pablo

Charts 

Castaways debuted on the #1 spot on Spotify's Viral 50 United States chart for May 12, 2021 The song remained #1 on the Viral 50 chart until June 4, 2021, and fell to second place on June 5, 2021.


References 

TikTok
2005 songs
Songs from animated series