The genus Dares, which is mainly native to Borneo, combines relatively small and mostly dark-colored Phasmatodea species.


Characteristics 
The representatives of this genus are very small with 25 to 45 mm in the male and 30 to 55 mm in the female sex Both sexes are always wingless and colored in different shades of beige, yellow and brown.
 In the case of the males, these colors usually form more or less species-typical patterns.
 Also characteristic of the respective species is the arrangement of the rather long and pointed spines of the males, which are on the head, the thorax and more or less pronounced on the abdomen can be found.
 The females, which are often less contrasting, are not prickly, but covered with tubercles all over their bodies.
 In the habitus they appear much wider than the rather slender males.
 In adult egg-laying females, the abdomen is clearly thickened.
 With them, too, the middle abdomen area is flattened on the sides and greatly broadened.
 As is typical for the Dataminae, they do not have a ovipositor to lay their eggs.


Way of life and reproduction 
The nocturnal insects hide during the day in the leafy layer of the ground or on or behind bark They are very lazy during the day.
 When touched, they let themselves fall to the ground with their front legs and antenna stretched out, as well as bent middle and hint legs placed against the body, where they playing dead.
 The females lay only one to three eggs per week in the soil during their average two-year life.
 These are 2.
5 to 4.
0 mm long and 2.
5 to 3.
1 mm wide and, depending on the species, more or less hairy.
 The 7 to 15 mm long nymphs hatch after three to six months and need more than half a year to become adult.


Taxonomy 
In 1875, Carl Stål established the genus Dares in the first description of Dares validispinus In addition, he transferred a species already described by John Obadiah Westwood as Acanthoderus ulula in 1859 to this genus.
 In 1904, William Forsell Kirby specified Dares validispinus  as the type species.
 Josef Redtenbacher described two other species that are still valid today, as well as two species that were later recognized as synonyms for Dares ulula.
 Philip Edward Bragg found five other Dares species in his extensive work on the phasmids living on Borneo, all of which he described in 1998.
 In the same work he also described a species found 20 years earlier on the Philippines island Palawan as Dares philippinensis.
 In the following year Oliver Zompro and Ingo Fritzsche published the description of Dares ziegleri, the so far last newly described species of the genus.
 Their affiliation to Dares is controversial.
 Already in 2004 Zompro withdrew the name again and synonymized it with Datames guangxiensis, which he placed in the genus Dares.
 Paul D.
 Brock and Masaya Okada lifted the synonymisation of Dares ziegleri as well as the assignment of Datames guangxiensis to Dares again.
 They put the latter in the genus Pylaemenes.
 Since a work by Joachim Bresseel and Jérôme Constant published in 2018 it is assigned to the genus Orestes and is therefore to be addressed as Orestes guangxiensis.
 This assignment was also Sarah Bank et al in their work on the spread of the Heteropterygidae, which was mainly based on genetic analysis published in 2021.
 With regard to the Dares species investigated there, it was found that Dares is a monophyletic group, which also includes two previously unknown or at least unidentified species (see cladogram).
 Also Dares ziegleri should be transferred to the genus Orestes following the work of Bresseel and Constant.


Valid species are:
Gültige Arten sind:
 Dares breitensteini Redtenbacher, 1906
 Dares kinabaluensis |Bragg, 1998
 Dares mjobergi Bragg, 1998
 Dares multispinosus Bragg, 1998
 Dares murudensis Bragg, 1998
 Dares navangensis Bragg, 1998
 Dares philippinensis Bragg, 1998
 Dares planissimus Bragg, 1998
 Dares ulula (Westwood, 1859)
(syn = Dares calamita Redtenbacher, 1906)
(syn = Dares corticinus Redtenbacher, 1906)
 Dares validispinus Stål, 1875
 Dares verrucosus Redtenbacher, 1906
 Dares verrucosus verrucosus Redtenbacher, 1906
 Dares verrucosus tawauensis Seow-Choen, 2016
 Dares ziegleri Zompro & Fritzsche, 1999

Terraristic 
Five species can be found in the terrariums of lovers Dares validispinus was first introduced in 1979 and was given PSG number 38 by the Phasmid Study Group.
 Dares verrucosus has been introduced several times since 1984 and was given PSG number 69.
 Since 1991 has been repeatedly imported Dares ulula listed under PSG number 117.
 It is considered the most delicate of the species in breeding.
 Similar or identical to Dares ulula is a breeding stock which is referred to as Dares spec.
 'Gunung Gading' after its locationin Sarawak.
 In addition, under the PSG number 332, a species collected by Bragg and Paul Jenning in 2006 is in breeding, which is initially named Dares sp.
 'Crocker Range'.
 It was identified in 2014 by Thies Büscher as Dares murudensis described by Bragg in 1998 on the basis of a female.
 The fifth species, Dares philippinensis, has been kept and bred since around 2010/2011.
 She received the PSG number 331.


Dares species only need small terrariums with high humidity and a substrate to lay their eggs Almost all of them can be fed with leaves of bramble (blackberries) or oak.


References

External links

 Heiminsektende by Daniel Dittmar with pictures and information, among others about different Dares stocks

Phasmatodea genera
Phasmatodea of Asia