Zach Dean is an American screenwriter and film producer, best known for writing the films Deadfall and The Tomorrow War.


Career
Dean's first produced screenplay was for the 2012 heist film Deadfall, directed by Stefan Ruzowitzky, and starring Eric Bana, Olivia Wilde, and Charlie Hunnam In 2005, Dean was on JetBlue Flight 292 from Burbank to New York when the passengers were informed that the plane's landing gear had malfunctioned.
 As the plane circled around for hours, Dean contemplated his mortality and vowed to write a screenplay about family, which would become the script for Kin (later renamed Deadfall).


Dean wrote the 2017 sci-fi action thriller 24 Hours to Live, directed by Brian Smrz and starring Ethan Hawke He wrote the sci-fi action time travel thriller The Tomorrow War (originally titled Ghost Draft), which is directed by Chris McKay and stars Chris Pratt, Yvonne Strahovski, JK Simmons, and Betty Gilpin.
 Originally scheduled to be released by Paramount Pictures, Amazon Studios acquired the rights to the film in a deal worth approximately $200 million, and release it on Prime Video on July 2, 2021.


Several of his screenplays have made The Black List survey of Hollywood's best unproduced scripts Beast, about a reformed criminal with a violent past, made the list in 2013.
 The World War II film Atlantic Wall, with Bradley Cooper attached to star and Gavin O'Connor to direct, made the list in 2015.
 Voyagers, a biopic for Warner Brothers which tells the love story of Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan, was on the 2016 Black List.
 The Gorge was on the 2020 Black List, and was purchased in 2020 by Skydance.
 Other yet-to-be-produced screenplays include the sci-fi film Canary, which was purchased in 2018 by Imagine Entertainment to be directed by Ron Howard; Methuselah, at Warner Brothers, based on the character from the Old Testament; and the action-thriller Layover.


Personal life
Dean is a Michigan native He earned a master's in writing from New York University Tisch School of the Arts in 2005.
  Before selling his first script, he taught digital film production and screenwriting at Riverdale Country School in The Bronx, New York.
 He has also worked as a bartender, carpenter, and casino dealer.


Filmography
 Deadfall (2012)
 24 Hours to Live (2017)
 The Tomorrow War (2017)

References

External links 
 

Living people
21st-century American male writers
21st-century American screenwriters
American male screenwriters
Screenwriters from Michigan
Tisch School of the Arts alumni
Year of birth missing (living people)