Danilo Orsi-Dadomo (born 19 April 1996) is an English professional footballer who plays for Boreham Wood, on loan from Harrogate Town, as a striker.


Early and personal life
Born in London, Orsi-Dadomo was raised in Enfield and Barnet He is of partial Italian and Scottish descent.


Career
Orsi-Dadomo played for Cockfosters before moving to the United States and playing college soccer with Eastern Florida State College (studying business management), scoring 27 goals in 32 games across two seasons, whilst also playing at club level for Chivas U19 and Fort Lauderdale Strikers U23

Upon his return to England, Orsi-Dadomo played non-league football for East Thurrock United, Hungerford Town, Hampton & Richmond Borough and Maidenhead United He was Maidenhead's Fans' Player of the Season for the 2020–21 season.


In June 2021 he was linked with a transfer to Football League clubs Burton Albion, Bradford City and Colchester United Later that month he signed for Football League team Harrogate Town.


On 1 January 2022, Orsi-Dadomo returned to the National League to join Boreham Wood on loan for the remainder of the 2021–22 season Orsi scored his first goal for the club on his first start as he scored the only goal of the game as his side defeated Wealdstone.


Career statistics

References

1996 births
Living people
English footballers
Footballers from the London Borough of Camden
Chivas USA players
Fort Lauderdale Strikers players
Cockfosters FC.
 players
East Thurrock United FC.
 players
Hungerford Town FC.
 players
Hampton & Richmond Borough FC.
 players
Maidenhead United FC.
 players
Harrogate Town AF.
C.
 players
Boreham Wood FC.
 players
English Football League players
National League (English football) players
Association football forwards
English expatriate footballers
English expatriates in the United States
Expatriate soccer players in the United States
College men's soccer players in the United States
English people of Italian descent
English people of Scottish descent