Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina (CECBiH) (, , ) is an institution, ie. administrative body responsible for regulating and supervising the election process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The CEC also oversees the work of local and regional election commissions, which regulate the electoral process in lower administrative units.

History

Establishment 
The Provisional Election Commission (PEC) ceased to exist after the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the session of the House of Representatives held on 21 August 2001 and at the session of the House of People held on 23 August 2001. The Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina was thus established.

On 16 November the High Representative appointed members of the BiH Election Commission from the list proposed by the Provisional Commission for Appointments which consisted of members of the Commission for Electing and Appointing Judges of the BiH Court and international members of the BiH Election Commission.

The following persons were appointed as members of the BiH Election Commission: Branko Petrić, representative of the Serb people, Lidija Korać, representative of the Croat people, Hilmo Pašić, representative of the Bosniak people, Vehid Šehić, representative of the Others, Ambassador Robert Beecroft, representative of the International community, Ambassador Dr. Gerhard Enver Schrönbergs, representative of the International community and Ambassador Victor A Tkachenko, representative of the International community.

First and second sessions 

The constitutional first session of the BiH Election Commission was held on 20 November 2001, and thus the Provisional Election Commission officially ceased to exist. A decision on establishing the Secretariat of the BiH Election Commission was passed at the same session. The Secretariat conducts professional and administrative-technical duties for the BiH Election Commission, the Complaints and Appeals Council and the Appellative Council.

At the second session of the BiH Election Commission held on 27 November 2001, Ms Lidija Korać was elected its first president. The BiH Election Commission adopted its Rules of Procedure at the same session.

Rotation procedure 

At 46th session of the BiH Election Commission held on 27 February 2003 rotation procedure on president position of this institution was made. Mr. Hilmo Pašić was elected second president and Mr. Vehid Šehić was elected third president. Following rotation on this position took place on 18 August 2005, when Mr. Branko Petrić was elected president. From 16 November 2006 to 15 February 2008 Mr. Stjepan Mikić was the president of BiH Central Election Commission. From 15 February 2008 to 8 May 2009 this function was performed by Dr. Suad Arnautović. Until 29 September 2011 the function of the president was performed by Mrs. Irena Hadžiabdić. Mr. Branko Petrić was president of the BiH Central Election Commission in the period from 9 September 2011 to 28 June 2013. Mr. Stjepan Mikić was president of the BiH Central Election Commission in the period from 28 June 2013 to 1 April 2015.

Dr. Ahmet Šantić was the president of the BiH Central Election Commission from 31 March 2015 to 1 January 2017, wherafter Dr. Irena Hadžiabdić assumed office of the president of the BiH Central Election Commission, who performed this duty until 30 September 2018. Mr. Branko Petrić assumed the position of the president from 1 October 2018 to 11 March 2020. As of 16 March 2020 the president of the BiH Central Election Commission is Mrs. Vanja Bjelica-Prutina.

Pursuant to Article 2.6 of the BiH Election Law, the President of the BiH Election Commission is appointed from amongst its members. Each member of the BiH Election Commission, a Croat, a Bosniak, a Serb and a representative of the Others, shall perform the duty of the president of the BiH Election Commission according to the rotation principle, once in seven (7) years for the period of twenty-one (21) months.

The BiH Election Commission changed its name to the BiH Central Election Commission in April 2006.

Members 
Current members of CECBiH are:

 Željko Bakalar, president
 dr. Suad Arnautović, member
 Irena Hadžiabdić, member
 dr. Ahmet Šantić, member
 Vlado Rogić, member
 Jovan Kalaba, member
 Vanja Bjelica-Prutina, member

List of presidents 
At 46th session of the BiH Election Commission held on 27 February 2003 rotation procedure on president position of this institution was made.

See Also 
 Politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Elections in Republika Srpska

References

External links 
Website of the Central Election Commission in English

Bosnia
Elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina