Fuertes de Fortín Fútbol Club was a football club that played in the Liga TDP. It was based in the town of Fortín de las Flores, Mexico.

History
The team was founded in August 2019 to return professional football to the town after more than 20 years without having a representative club of the town.  For regulatory reasons, during the first season the club competed under the name Club Santos Córdoba, a franchise whose registration was used for the birth of the Fuertes.

In 2020 the club got its own registration in the Mexican Football Federation, so it was officially able to compete under the real name of the team. The club finished in second place in their group and therefore entered the promotion phase.  In the promotion phase, the club eliminated the teams Lechuzas UPGCH, Halcones Negros, Faraones de Texcoco to reach the Zone Semifinals against Aragón F.C., on June 19, 2021 the team achieved their promotion to the Liga Premier de México after defeating the capital's team in the penalty shootout by 4–5, after drawing 2–2 on the aggregate scoreboard. On June 26, 2021 the team won the South Zone championship after defeat Toluca by 2–3 in the aggregate. Following this result, the team secured a place in the Serie A de México.

On July 3, 2021 the team won the national championship of the Liga TDP by defeating Club RC–1128 by 6–5 in the penalty shootout, this after drawing at zero goals during the regular period of the match, the game was held at the Estadio Azteca in Mexico City.

On July 2021 the team was sold to businessmen from Orizaba, who relocated it to their city and was renamed Montañeses F.C. After that, Fuertes de Fortín was dissolved since it was not registered in the new season of the Liga TDP.

Stadium
Fuertes de Fortín played their home games at the Unidad Deportiva Eliezer Morales, a sports complex located in Fortín de las Flores, Veracruz. The soccer field has a capacity to host 2,000 fans.

Honors
 Tercera División de México (1):2020–2021

References

External links 

Liga MX Official Profile

Football clubs in Veracruz
2019 establishments in Mexico
Association football clubs established in 2019