The 1982 Nobel Prize in Literature was awarded to the Colombian writer Gabriel García Márquez "for his novels and short stories, in which the fantastic and the realistic are combined in a richly composed world of imagination, reflecting a continent's life and conflicts."

García Márquez was the first Colombian and fourth Latin American writer to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Laureate

Gabriel García Márquez is best known for the novel One Hundred Years of Solitude (1967), mixing the realistic with the fantastic in a literary style known as Magical realism. In addition to several novels he has also written short stories, novellas and journalism.

Reactions
The choice of García Márquez as the Nobel Prize Laureate in 1982 was enthusiastically well received by literary critics and readers around the world. García Márquez was among the favourites to receive the prize, other candidates for the prize that got strong attention in the press this year were Octavio Paz, Marguerite Yourcenar and Nadine Gordimer.

Award ceremony speech
In his award ceremony speech on 10 December 1982 Lars Gyllensten of the Swedish Academy said that the Academy "could not be said to bring forward an unknown writer", pointing out the unusual success of García Márquez's 1967 novel One Hundred Years of Solitude. He spoke of García Márquez as a "rare storyteller richly endowed with a material, from imagination and experience, which seems inexhaustible" and his importance in bringing attention to Latin American literature. "The great novels remind one of William Faulkner", Gyllensten said, "With his stories García Márquez has created a world of his own which is a microcosmos. In its tumultuous, bewildering yet graphically convincing authenticity it reflects a continent and its human riches and poverty."

Nobel lecture

Gabriel García Márquez Nobel lecture The Solitude of Latin America was delivered at the Swedish Academy on 8 December 1982.

References

External links
Award Ceremony speech nobelprize.org
Nobel lecture nobelprize.org

Nobel Prize in Literature