The 2022 Nigerian gubernatorial elections will be held on June 18, 2022, in Ekiti State, and July 16, 2022, in Osun State. The last regular gubernatorial elections for both states were in 2018. The All Progressives Congress holds both offices with Ekiti Governor Kayode Fayemi being term-limited after serving his second nonconsecutive term and Osun Governor Gboyega Oyetola running for a second term with his party's nomination.

Results summary

Notes

Ekiti 

Incumbent Governor Kayode Fayemi (APC) was re-elected to a second nonconsecutive term in 2018 with 51.34% of the vote. He will be term-limited in 2022, and will therefore be unable to seek re-election for a third term. Eight APC candidates competed for the party's nomination, although seven of the aspirants withdrew on the day of the primary in protest of the process' alleged bias towards the eventual winner, Abiodun Oyebanji (former Secretary to the State Government). Later on January 27, official results were announced with Oyebanji defeating Kayode Ojo (businessman) and Michael Opeyemi Bamidele (Senator for Ekiti Central, former House of Representatives member, and former Lagos State cabinet official) along with the five other withdrawn candidates by over 100,000 votes in a direct primary.

Of the PDP candidates, Bisi Kolawole (former Ekiti State PDP Chairman, former Commissioner for Environment, and former House of Assembly member) emerged victorious over former Governor Olusegun Oni and former Deputy Governor Kolapo Olushola after Kolawole's main opponent Ekiti South Senator Abiodun Olujimi withdrew in protest of the primary's alleged bias. Kolawole defeated Oni, Olushola, Adewale Aribisala (former House of Representatives member and PDP National Treasurer), and Kayode Adaramodu (banker) along with other aspirants by over 300 votes in an indirect primary on January 26.

Osun 

Incumbent Governor Gboyega Oyetola (APC) was elected to a first term in 2018 and is seeking reelection for a second and final term. Former House of Representatives member for Irepodun/Olurunda/Osogbo/Orolu and 2018 APC gubernatorial candidate Yusuf Sulaimon Lasun along with former Secretary to the State Government Moshood Adeoti attempted to unseat Oyetola in the APC primary but were defeated by over 200,000 votes on February 19.

For the PDP, at least six announced candidates have purchased PDP nomination forms and will compete for the party's nomination, namely Ademola Adeleke (former Senator for Osun West, 2018 PDP gubernatorial nominee, member of the Adeleke family of Ede, and uncle of opponent Dele Adeleke), Dele Adeleke (accountant, member of the Adeleke family of Ede, and nephew of opponent Ademola Adeleke), Fatai Akinade Akinbade (former Secretary to the State Government and 2018 ADC gubernatorial nominee), Dotun Babayemi (2019 ADP Osun West senatorial nominee), Akin Ogunbiyi (Chairman of Mutual Benefits Assurance), and Sanya Omirin (former Atakunmosa East LG Chairman).

See also 
 2022 Nigerian elections

References 

gub
2022