Mir Mohammad Alikhan is a Pakistani born Wall Street trained investment banker born on September 24, 1965, in Karachi, Pakistan. He is also known as MirMak. Currently resides in Pakistan after moving back to Karachi in 2010 from London where he was residing. He also served as an advisor in the government of General (R) Pervez Musharraf, Ex President of Pakistan, in what is known as The National Reconstruction Bureau NRB from November 1999 to 2001. Mir is an author of four books and several articles on finance, politics and self improvement. Mir has been covered as "The First Muslim Owner Of An Investment Bank on Wall Street" by Hello Pakistan Magazine which is part of Hello Magazine Worldwide. He has also been featured in Pakistani newspapers such as Dawn and Daily Pakistan  Mir's life has also been covered in a motivational book Mir has also been featured in Who's Who section of the website Pride of Pakistan. Mir was also covered in an article titled "How Pakistan's Mir became Wall Street's MAK in a TV Magazine called MM News.

Family background and early life 
Alikhan hails from The Mirs of Hyderabad Deccan and is the maternal grandson of Syed Ali Asghar Bilgrami, Governor of the state of Aurangabad in the princely state of Mir Osman Ali Khan. He is the son of Mir Abid Alikhan and Farhat Bilgrami.

Alikhan studied at Sharfabad Government School for the first few years of his education and then moved to St. Patrick's High School, Karachi. He moved to the United States of America in his early teenage years along with his family. His state of residence was New Jersey where he worked full time at Burger King mopping floors and cleaning tables and started attending Rutgers University, New Brunswick Campus in the evenings to study finance and economics. For the next three years all different kinds of odd jobs as a security guard at AT&T, also in the apparel department of Kmart, finally landing a job as a bank teller at the Peoples Bank on Easton Ave New Brunswick New Jersey. Mir was an active member of Rutgers University Table Tennis team and also served for one year as the elected President of Pakistan Students Association at Rutgers university.

Professional life 
During his third year at Rutgers University, he landed a Job at the Prudential Financial Services, as a Estate Planning and Taxation Consultant. At Prudential Financial Mir then moved to Bache & Co., an investment banking division of The Prudential Financial Services at One Penn Plaza in New York City. Prudential Financial had acquired Bache & Co. in 1981 renaming it The Prudential-Bache Securities. Mir started as a Cold Caller at The Pru-Bache, he stayed at the Pru-Bache for 8 months opening accounts for the senior stockbrokers. Mir Then moved to a smaller investment banking & stock brokerage firm specializing in small cap Initial Public Offerings IPO on Wall Street called South Richmond Securities.

At The South Richmond Securities, Alikhan was promoted as a group sales manager during his second year at the firm. Mir then moved to Commonwealth Securities and then to The Barrett Day Securities as an Executive Vice President before opening up his own full service investment banking firm by the name of Klein Maus & Shire better known as KMS Investment Bank at 110 Wall Street in Lower Manhattan in the year 1994. During his tenure at Barret Day, Mir registered himself as a Registered investment adviser RIA with The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission  Mir then founded a company by the name of International Investment Management IIM which focused on managing funds for the Gulf Cooperation Council & the Middle Eastern high net worth clients. KMS was licensed by NASDAQ & The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission to provide full service investment banking, retail, brokerage, advisory services along with underwriting for IPOs in 50 American states. 
In the subsequent years Mir founded a holding company by the name of United States Financial Group which commonly came to be known as U.S.F.G Inc. registered as an investment banking holding company with The U.S.SEC. U.S.F.G took over KMS Investment Banking in addition to acquiring United States Military Commissary Company by the name of U.S.Military Resale Group based in Virginia, and a herbal medicine marketing company named as The Sureal, based out of Salt Lake City, Utah. U.S.F.G was formed with an intention of listing itself on the stock exchange was successful in filing its IPO with The SEC in 1998 through an independent 50 year old investment banking firm called Kashner Davidson based out of Florida. 
The U.S.F.G Board Of Directors included Joseph E. Antonini, President of Kmart, The Sports Authority, Borders Bookstore, and The Home Depot. Another Director on U.S.F.G's board was baseball Hall Of Fame player, Willie Mays. The Vice President of The Forbes Mr. Leonard Yablon also joined U.S.F.G. 
The U.S.F.G received an independent valuation from Kashner Davidson of $150 Million Dollars in 1998 consisting of 10 million shares at $15 a share to be listed on NASDAQ of which 82% was owned by its founder and Chairman MirMak.

Controversy 
KMS Investment Bank closed its doors in March 1999 and Mir Mohammad Alikhan left for the Middle east to visit his clients and landed in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. When Mir left America to visit his clients there were no charges against him. He left from John F. Kennedy International Airport with a return ticket in hand. Three days after he left, The Attorney General of New York revealed a five count indictment of Grand Larceny accusing Mir of stealing funds from his clients including the New York Mafia family head, Thomas Gambino. From Dubai Mir contacted his law firm Proskauer Rose, a 110 year old international law firm with 12 offices worldwide and a team of 700 lawyers.  His lawyers advised him not to fly back to America under the current circumstances as because Mir was never informed about the Grand Jury hearings that were being conducted by the office of The Attorney General, which was his legal right. Mir has never returned to America since 1999 and is considered a fugitive from the law. The case against him has never went to trial in his absence.

The New York Times article 
Almost nine months after Mir had left America and after joining General R Pervez Musharraf government in November 1999, The New York Times wrote a full page article about Mir Mohammad Alikhan on its first edition of the millennium on January 2, 2000. The same article was duplicated by many international newspapers including The Los Angeles Times. According to Mir's several interviews and recorded video reply to the article with documented evidences, he alleges that The NYT article was misleading because it was published 9 months after Mir had left America and after joining the controversial government of Pervez Musharraf which came into existence through a military coup. Mir objects on the timing of the article and has always questioned as to why it was not published when the indictment was revealed against him instead of 9 months later after he joined the government of Musharraf. Mir also reveals in his hour long video  reply to the article with documents that the article was published with misleading information, wrong revenue figures of U.S.F.G. Mir also says that The Mafia Boss, Thomas Gambino was never his client, he never even spoke to him or met him. Gambino was a client of one of the Stock Brokers at KMS, Maurice (Mike) Gross for 15 years. Mike had moved to KMS from another investment bank and as a routine all his clients were moved to KMS Investment Bank along with other clients of Mr. Gross.

The New York Post article 
The New York Post article titled "Scam Hits Home For Mob Broker", published om May 12, 1999, 9 months prior to the article published by The New York Times article  clearly writes that Maurice (Mike)Gross had been the stockbroker for the Gambino family since 15 years, including Gambino's son and his wife. The article states that Gross was the family stockbroker and started to make unauthorized stock trades in their accounts according to the Gambino lawyer Peter Raymond. It further goes on to say that New York Supreme Court Justice Herbert Ramos barred stockbroker Maurice Gross from selling his home after the hearing how he had allegedly looted Thomas F. Gambino's stock account for $4 million. In January 1999, The New York Post writes, after the Gambinos uncovered the alleged stock scam by Maurice Gross, he (Gross) immediately transferred the ownership shares of his home to his wife and put the property up for sale. Mir Mohammad Alikhan had mentioned in several of his interviews that the unauthorized trading and the scam was conducted by Maurice Gross and he had never even met any member of the Gambino family, the Gambino himself or conducted any transaction on his behalf. Maurice Gross had moved to KMS Investment Bank, Mir's firm, in 1997 from a 90 year old investment bank named The Gruntal & Co. along with hundreds of his previous clients and the Gambino's account was one of them. The article concludes with a paragraph that the Gambinos sued Maurice Gross and his defunct investment firm, KMS Investment Bank.

Political involvements 
While living in America Mir was a Republican Party member and a political action committee donor. He was the Member of The New Jersey Governors' Council in 1998 under the Governorship of Christine Todd Whitman. He also served as the Vice Chairman of her inaugural committee. Mir has also served as The Grand Marshall of the Republican Party of Florida under the Governorship of Jeb Bush. Mir was involved in several Republican presidential committees and was an active member of the election committee of Congressman Richard Zimmer. In Pakistan Mir has stayed away from joining and political party.

Awards and speeches 
Mir Mohammad Alikhan has been a regular speaker at several universities and seminars in Pakistan. He has also provided training to the prosecutors of National Accountability Bureau NAB in the field of Anti Money Laundering as well as identifying terrorism financing. Mir Mohammad Alikhan has received awards from The Government of Pakistan organizations as well as 2 Governors' of the province of Sindh, Pakistan. He continues to volunteer his time for the development of youth across Pakistan for which he has been awarded by notable organisations of Pakistan.

Speeches 
MirMak's speech at the National Defence University, Islamabad, A Pakistan Armed Forces University. Topic of the speech was "Benefits of Capital Markets to Pakistan' Future". Attended by the Ex-Governor State Bank of Pakistan. President NDU Lieutenant General Rizwan Akhtar. Speaker Of The House, National Assembly of Pakistan, Mr. Ayaz Sadiq, Advisor To The Prime Minister Of Pakistan, Dr. Mussaddiq Malik and other dignitaries. 
Speech as the Chief Guest at the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE Pakistan Chapter
Speech at the Institute of Business Administration Karachi Main Campus conducted by The IBA HR Club on the subject of "Success Starts With Failure".
 Speech at the University of Punjab on the topic of Capital Markets
 Speech at the Project Management Institute Islamabad annual conference 
 Speech at the Abasyn University Peshawar on the topic of Entrepreneurial Traits 
 Speech at Lahore School of Economics on the topic of "Success Comes with Positive Mental Attitude" 
 Speech at  on the topic of " Needed Disruptive Finance in Pakistan"

Awards
Award from President of Pakistan Dr. Arif Alvi at the graduation ceremony from Naval war College, Lahore Pakistan at the successful completion of Maritime Security Workshop MSW 2018
Award from The Governor Of Sindh, Pakistan, Ishratul Ibad for services rendered in the field of youth development and guidance in the province of Sindh
Award from  Governor Muhammad Zubair Umar for services rendered in the field of youth development by Mir Mohammad Alikhan
Award from Dr. Amjad Saqib, Founder & Chairman of The Akhuwat Foundation for his volunteer work in the field of youth education in Pakistan
Appreciation shield from Director General National Accountability Bureau NAB Sindh for training NAB prosecutors in the subject of anti-money laundering and on techniques to identify terrorism financing
Award from the Vice Chancellor of Mohammad Ali Jinnah University for conducting a one-day seminar in the field of capital markets to train 300 students
Received an award from the Ambassador of Switzerland to Pakistan for training the youth of Sindh in the field of financial markets
Award from the Principal of Kinnaird College for Women for training the girl students on the subject for soft skills

Articles and books 
Mir's articles have been published in newspapers and nagazines of five different countries on the subjects of global politics, political economy, finance and personal development and motivation. Mir has authored four books ranging from personal development to capital markets and financial regulations.

Articles 
An article titled " All well now or Pakistan will be another Argentinian Paradox?" in Global Village Space 
An article titled "The solution to Pakistan's looming economic meltdown" in Daily Times 
An article titled "Dubai's Economy is Melting Like a Glacier in the Desert" in Being Guru  
An article titled "Empowering Youth of Balochistan Through Skill Development" in The Pakistan Armed Forces Magazine called Hilal English 
An article titled "Will the 'Saudi Help',help us" in Global Village Space.
An article titled "How to finance this Dam" in INCPAK  
An article titled "What would the world look like after Coronavirus: Economically,Politically and Socially"in Proshareng 
An article titled "The Relevance of Investment Banking to the IT Industry" in ProPakistani. 
 An article titled " Corona Virus and Global Economy" in Baaghi TV 
 An article titled " Shaikh,Shale Or The Czars.Who is going to win this oil Production War?" in Baaghi TV.
 An article titled " They take loans to educate themselves, and we take loans to build roads" in Baaghi TV.
 An article titled " What would the world like after corona virus.....?" in Baaghi TV. 
 An article titled " Timing of article 370 in Indian economy" in Suchi Baat  
 An article titled " The Game Behind Arab-Israel-Indian Nexus " in Suchi Baat 
 An article titled " Mir Lashes Finance Minister Ishaq Dar on clerical Error " in INCPAK 
 An article titled " This "STARTUP" Culture will kill Pakistan's reputation soon." in Khaleej Magazine  
 An article titled " Eid Economics: Generation of Rs. 450 Billion Economic Activity" in Global Village Space  
 An article titled " Economic Future of [Afghanistan]: Linked with [CPEC], [Pakiskan] and the region" in Global Village Space  
 An article titled " Turkey, Pakistan, Iran, Malaysia should form a force to protect Palestinians " in Global Village Space  
 An article titled " 7 Immediate Economic Solutions for Government" 
 An article titled " Why is India and World afraid of CPEC? " in MM News 
 An article titled " What would the World like after Corona Virus " in weehinthong 
 An article titled " How to protect your mind from negativity " in MM News 
 An article titled " If Usman was a man in uniform then, All these channels would have gone crazy screaming " 
 An interview titled " We are wiping out the monopoly over information in Capital Markets " in Business Recorder
 An interview titled " Foreign Investors are happy, But local Investors seem unhappy " in Siasat.pk

Books

Educational initiatives
Alikhan founded a skill development and education company by the name of Ecademy Educational Systems Private Limited, commonly known as eCademy in 2018. The goal was to give training to the youth of Pakistan through a hybrid online/offline methodology in all digital and high tech skills leading to freelancing earnings opportunity. A state of the art Learning Management System was developed and the company started parting trainings to the youth of Pakistan. The company is currently affiliated with The Lahore Garrison University, a Pakistan Army university. The company is also registered with The National Vocational & Technical Training Commission (NAVTTC) established by the government of Pakistan. eCademy is also a training partner for the consortium of schools in Pakistan comprising 3600 educational institutions called The Pakistan Academic Consortium (PAC). eCademy works particularly in the rural areas of Pakistan which is considered the most neglected when it comes to digital skills training. With 81,000 registered online users, eCademy aims to bring skill development trainings across Pakistan particularly in the rural areas.

Projects in Balochistan 
From 2019 to 2020, eCademy trained 4280 students from Turbat, Balochistan free of cost in collaboration with The Frontier Corps South Balochistan. Students from University of Turbat, Attashad College, Turbat Law College and The Turbat Girls Degree College were given training in 14 digital skills all leading to freelancing earnings. 60% of the students were females as eCademy believes in empowering the most neglected segment of the youth of Balochistan, female students.

References

Living people
1965 births
Pakistani stock traders
Pakistani businesspeople
Pakistani emigrants to the United States
Pakistani people of Hyderabadi descent
University of Karachi alumni
People from Karachi