Kandathil Mathew Abraham (born 30 December 1957) is a retired Indian IAS officer who is serving as Chief Principal Secretary of Chief Minister of Kerala, Chief Executive Officer of KIIFB and Chairman of Kerala Development and Innovation Strategic Council. He retired as the Chief Secretary of Kerala in December 2017. He belongs to 1982 batch of IAS. He was instrumental in bringing out Sahara Group Scam when he was a member of Securities and Exchange Board of India.

Education 
Abraham did his B. Tech in Civil Engineering from University of Kerala and did M. Tech in Industrial Management from IIT Kanpur. He completed his Ph.D from University of Michigan and also a Certified Chartered Financial Analyst.

Career 
Abraham started his career as Assistant Collector. He was District Collector in Alappuzha and Ernakulam Districts. He was Secretary in Finance, Education an Housing Department. He was whole time member in Securities and Exchange Board of India from 2008 to 2011. During his tenure at SEBI, he exposed the financial irregularities at Sahara Group and subsequently led to the closure of Sahara Group. He then served as Principal Secretary in Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer department, Science and technology department and Higher Education department. He served as Additional Chief Secretary in Finance, Higher Education and Social Justice Department before being appointed as Chief Secretary. He succeeded Nalini Netto as the Chief Secretary of Kerala. He retired in December 2017. He was instrumental in setting up KIIFB, and till day serving as the Chief Executive officer. In May 2021, he was appointed as the Chief Principal Secretary of Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan. He was awarded Satyendra Dubey Memorial Award in 2016 by IIT Kanpur. He was visiting faculty at IIT Kanpur and Professor of Finance, Asian School of Business.

References 

Living people
1957 births
Indian Administrative Service officers
Indian Administrative Service officers from Kerala
Civil Servants from Kerala
District magistrate