May Calamawy (born 1986) is an Egyptian-Palestinian actress. She is best known for her role in the Hulu television series Ramy as Dena Hassan. She will also appear in the upcoming Disney+ series Moon Knight.

Early life 
Calamawy was born in 1986 in Bahrain to a Palestinian mother from Jordan and an Egyptian father. She also lived in Doha, Qatar, and Houston, Texas. Calamawy is bilingual, as she speaks both English and Arabic. She has alopecia areata, and first got the condition when she was 22.

Calamawy completed high school in Bahrain, and moved to Boston, Massachusetts to study industrial design because her father wanted her to. However, she applied to Emerson College, and told her parents "if I get in, I'm going." She was accepted and has a B.A. in theatre studies from Emerson College. Calamawy has also studied at the William Esper Studio in New York City.

Career 
Calamawy started her career acting in short films. After attending college, she participated in the New York Arab American Comedy Festival. Her first major film role was in 2013, when she starred in Tobe Hooper's film Djinn, which was the first horror film to be produced in the United Arab Emirates. In 2017, she had a recurring role in the National Geographic miniseries The Long Road Home, as well as guest-starring roles in The Brave and Madam Secretary. The following year, she guest-starred in the CBS crime drama television series FBI. In October 2018, it was announced that she would have a recurring role in the Hulu comedy-drama series Ramy, playing Ramy's sister, Dena Hassan. In 2020, she had a voice role as Ellie Malik in the video game NBA 2K21. In 2021, she appeared in the film Together Together with Ed Helms and Patti Harrison. In January of the same year, it was announced she would appear in the upcoming Disney+ miniseries Moon Knight, which is expected to premiere in 2022.

Filmography

Films

Television

Video games

References

External links 
 
 

21st-century actresses
1986 births
Living people