An Indian burn is a pain-inducing prank, where the prankster grabs onto the victim's forearm or wrist, and starts turning the skin away from themselves with one hand, and with another hand towards themselves, causing an unpleasant burning sensation to the skin. The prank is popular in a school setting, like other popular pranks such as wedgie, wet willie, shoe-lacing and purple nurple.

Naming

Terminology
The prank is known by various different names, such as Indian sunburn or Indian rug burn, and also as Chinese wrist burn, or simply Chinese burn and as the snake bite.

Etymology
The term indian burn possibly comes from the fact that after the prank the skin's color changes to reddish, which might be a phenotype reference to "redskinned" Native Americans.

Another possible explanation is that the name is referencing torture methods attributed to Native Americans.

Variations
A variation of the prank can be done with a yarn that can be rubbed against the skin in a similar manner when starting fire in a small and dried haystack.

Criticism
Some Native Americans disapprove the use of the term Indian burn, including other vocabulary starting with the prefix "Indian-", such as Indian corn, Indian summer and Indian giver, among others.

Statistics
According to a poll gathered in United Kingdom, with sample size of 1,844 adults, 27% recalled being victims of Chinese burns in secondary school.

Pop culture

Comic strip
A comic strip joke made by Adey Bryant, depicts a humorous scene at a hospital where a boy has been admitted to casualty and lies there in bed while his mother talks to a doctor. The speech reads: "I think your son is being bullied. He's suffering from 80% Chinese wrist burns."

TV series
In the animated TV series Bob's Burgers, its 52nd episode titled Bob and Deliver has a scene where a character named Zeke declines substitute teachers proposal for cooking, with a quote: "Cooking's stupid! The only cooking I do is an Indian burn!" and he then grabs onto student next to him to perform an Indian burn, while the other student yells in pain, quote: "Ah! Zeke, it burns!". Even in the Season 12 episode of The Simpsons, "Bye Bye Nerdie," Lisa Simpson's forearm was Indian burned offscreen by a female bully in her school named Francine, who only bullies and beats up nerds and geeks, and she showed that to Nelson, Jimbo, Kearney, and Dolph while asking them if they're interested in bodyguard protection against Francine.

References

Abuse
Bullying
Pain
Practical jokes
Suffering
Native American topics